In rural Haiti, miles outside of Croix-des-Bouquets and across a river from the eastern neighborhoods of Port-au-Prince, I consulted my map, stepped back onto my bike, and made a right turn to loop back home.
The map that I used was not made by city planners or expert surveyors or travel agents or locals, but by volunteers scattered around the world.

As Haiti recovered from the Port-au-Prince / Leogane earthquake in January 2010, several satellite agencies stepped up to share their maps of Haiti. NOAA and other US agencies flew over the coast and shared aerial photos with more detail. Even photos from US military drones were shared to help rescuers search inside collapsed buildings.

Responses to a disaster are difficult to coordinate in any country (consider the response the Hurricane Katrina), but in parts of Haiti without even a bare road map, it seemed impossible. For first responders, there was an immediate need to have situational awareness of their community and the road network. For longer-term aid to succeed, there were questions: how do you deliver supplies to hospitals when there is no map of hospitals, or inspect all of the schools when there is no map of schools? If a tent city fell through the cracks, many more lives could be lost. Volunteers everywhere were encouraged to share geodata and trace their own maps of Haitian cities.
The response from remote volunteers was unprecedented. Student groups and Haitian communities in the US were taking part in translating Haitian Creole text messages and mapping their reports on Ushahidi. Universities published Haitian Creole resources and geodata online. Crisis Camp formed in several cities to respond to information needs on the front lines.
OpenStreetMap volunteers took on the difficult task of mapping much of Haiti from scratch. With the addition of clear new imagery from around Haiti, parts of the map came together with impressive speed and accuracy.

Part of the reason that the digital response had so many components was that there were several platforms and ideas circulating in the disaster response world. Ushahidi had been successful at gathering reports, but were people acting on them? The Sahana platform was being promoted as a platform for sustainable, longer-term responses -- would that attract organizations, donors, and coders in the same way as a big-news disaster map? If a for-profit company like Google put up a person-finder and crisis map, would people be comfortable sharing their names and data?

I took part in a CrisisCamp DC’s response to an earthquake in Chile the following month. I had been interested in crisis-mapping, but didn’t have enough server or database skills to contribute to projects like Ushahidi or Sahana. OLPC’s Nicholas Negroponte and Project Waveplace’s Tim Falconer made videos arguing for One Laptop per Child to pitch in to rebuild Haiti’s education system. I spent long hours transforming my online mapping activity for OLPC into an offline Haiti map, with support for real GIS data and Ushahidi’s GeoRSS API.

It wasn’t until summer of 2011 that I was talking about visiting Haiti in person. At the end of my workday at Esri, I would head back to my apartment in Loma Linda. Late at night I’d walk past where the road ended, into the dusty hills, talking with Adam Holt about what he had seen in Haiti on his last visit. Finally I agreed to visit Haiti from mid-September to November at a school in Croix-des-Bouquets known as Ecole Shalom. We had other volunteers from OLPC and other education groups visiting all of the time. It was fantastic.

That’s how I got to that spot in Haiti, and how my neighborhood was mapped so well.

The funny thing is, the satellite mappers couldn’t be perfect. They could see a building, but they wouldn’t know if it was a church, a market, or a school. They could see roads but not names of roads. They could draw a path, but not know whether it was too overgrown or muddy for someone to pass. We need local mappers to inform our new maps of the world. So we need to talk about what you can add to OpenStreetMap.

